---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Conduct of Coding
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-04-23
labels:
  - Ethics
  - Coding Standards
---
##Ethics and Morals
Morality is a very gray subject. Right and wrong can seem very straightforward at first, but become increasingly muddled as more variables get added. Ethics are your rules to clear up and standardize these morals in order to clear up that confusion. But with an already messy subject matter, as well as conflicting morals of people, it can seem like you're making rules for a game where rules are constantly broken. It's disheartening, and when put in situations with no right answer, it might be tempting to forgo altogether. But I believe ethics should be in the front of your mind when making decisions.

##Ethics in Coding
In the realms of software engineering, I think ethics mean the same thing they do in any other setting. The standard you're aiming to achieve is the same as in any other profession, and the challenges of that are the same as well. To me, there are two big challenges in ethics that are the toughest to deal with. The first is the unknown. Trying to weigh your actions against consequences you might not ever be able to predict in the first place. The next is conflicting interests. Sometimes your interests conflict with your employers, or your employers with the public, or maybe even the public with others in the public. As you add more groups, it gets harder to balance all of that out. Bill Sourour's personal account, [The code I'm still ashamed of](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-code-im-still-ashamed-of-e4c021dff55e/#.tsjl7lkxy), provides a good example of these problems in the field.

##Bill's Case
To summarize, the article talks about advertising for a perscription drug that ended up being a factor in teenage suicide. A situation like this is where the unknown elements really are important. Real life is never as clear cut as the thought experiments in philosophy class. You have to think of potential consequences, and on top of that decide if they're ethical or not. To me, medicine is an instant red flag that more thought has to be put into your actions. Lives are easily on the line. After that, you also have to deal with the conflicting interests of your employer versus the public. Having a quiz lead to the same answer no matter what is dishonest and against ACM code 1.3. While advertisements would never advertise competing products, the company should put the interests of the public over advertising, and if not, should fall on the coder to raise an issue.

##Case Closed?
But of course, the problem is real life isn't that simple. Maybe you need the job to survive. If you refused the work, maybe the drug company would just hire another developer to do it in your stead. Maybe the company could be more clear in their warnings, or perhaps just not even sell a drug with that bad of side effects. It's really easy to get caught up in the things out of your control. Rather than worrying about that, I believe all we can do is make sure what we have control over does meet those ethical standards. ACM's last code is aptly the personal standard. The more people who personally follow these codes. The more the "standards" actually become standard.
